#### Process types

- **Protected Processes** - These processes were introduced in Windows Vista. They were created to support Digital Rights Management (DRM) protection by preventing intrusive access to processes rendering DRM-protected content. For example, no other process (even running with administrator rights) can read the memory within a protected process address space, so the DRM-protected data cannot be directly stolen.

- **UWP Processes** - These processes, available starting with Windows 8, host the Windows Runtime, and typically are published to the Microsoft Store. A UWP process executes inside an AppContainer - a sandbox of sorts that limits the operations this process can carry out.

- **Protected Processes Light (PPL)** - These processes (available from Windows 8.1) extended the protection mechanism from Vista by adding several levels of protection and even allowing third-party services to run as PPL, protecting them from intrusive access, and from termination, even by admin-level processes.

- **Minimal Processes** - These processes available from Windows 10 version 1607, is a truly new form of process. The address space of a minimal process does not contain the usual images and data structures that a normal process does. For example, there is no executable file mapped into the process address space, and no DLLs. The process address space is truly empty.

- **Pico Processes** - These processes are minimal processes with one addition: a Pico provider, which is a kernel driver that intercepts Linux system calls and translates them to equivalent Windows system calls. These processes are used with the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL), available from Windows 10 version 1607.

#### Name

Some processes don't have name. It means "Name" is not unique identifier at all. Examples of processes without a name: System, Secure System, Registry, Memory Compression, System Idle Process and System Interrupts.

- System Interrupts is not really a process, it’s just used as a way to measure the time spent in the kernel servicing hardware interrupts and Deferred Procedure Calls. Both are beyond the scope of this book. You can find more information in the Windows Internals and Windows Kernel Programming books.

- System Idle Process is also not a real process. It always has a Process ID (PID) of zero. It accounts for Windows idle time. This is where the CPUs go when there is nothing to do.

- The System process is a true process, technically being a minimal process as well. It always has a PID of 4. It represents everything going on in kernel space - the memory used by the kernel and kernel drivers, the open handles, threads and so on.

- The Secure System process is only available on Windows 10 and Server 2016 (and later) systems that boot with Virtualization Based Security enabled. It represents everything going on in the secure kernel. Refer to the Windows Internals book for more information.

- The Registry process is a minimal process available from Windows 10 version 1803 (RS4) that is used as “working area” for managing the registry, rather than using the Paged Pool as was done in previous versions. For the purposes of this book, it’s an implementation detail that does not affect the way the registry is accessed programmatically.

- The Memory Compression process is a minimal process available on Windows 10 version 1607 (but not on servers) and holds compressed memory in its address space. Memory compression is a feature added in Windows 10 to conserve physical memory (RAM), especially useful for devices with limited resources such as phones and IoT (Internet of Things) devices. Confusingly, Task Manager does not show this process, but it is shown properly by Process Explorer.

#### PID

PID is the unique ID of the Process. PIDs are multiple of 4, where the lowest valid PID value is 4 (belonging to the System processes). Process IDs are reused once a process terminates, so it's possible to see a new process with a PID that was once used for a (now gone) process. 

> [!info] 
>  Handles also start with 4 and are multiples of 4, just like PIDs. This is not coincidence. In fact, PIDs (and thread IDs) are handle values in a special handle table used just for this purpose.

#### Status

Status can have 3 values: Running, Suspended and Not Responding.

| Process type                     | Running when…                                         | Suspended when…                                           | Not responding when…                                                       |
| -------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| GUI process (not UWP)            | GUI thread is responsive                              | All threads in the process are suspended                  | GUI thread does not check message queue for at least 5 seconds             |
| CUI process (not UWP)UWP process | At least one thread is not suspendedin the foreground | All threads in the process are suspendedin the background | Never<br><br>GUI thread does notcheck message queue for at least 5 seconds |
A process with a GUI must have at least one thread that handles its user interface. This thread has a message queue, created for it as soon as it called any UI or GDI function. This thread must therefore pump messages - that is, listen to its message queue and process messages that arrive. The typical listening functions are GetMessage or PeekMessage. If none is called for at least 5 seconds, Task Manager changes the status to Not Responding, the windows owned by that thread become faded and “(Not Responding)” is added to the window’s caption. The problematic thread did not examine its message queue for one of three possible reasons:

- It was suspended for whatever reason.

- It’s waiting for some I/O operation to complete, and it takes longer than 5 seconds.

- It’s doing some CPU intensive work that takes longer than 5 seconds.

UWP processes are special in the sense that they are suspended unwillingly when they move into the background such as when the application’s window is minimized. A simple experiment can verify this case: Open the modern Calculator on Windows 10, and locate it in Task Manager. You should see its status as Running, meaning it can respond to user input and generally do its thing. Now minimize Calculator, and you’ll see the status changing after a few brief seconds to Suspended. This kind of behavior exists for UWP processes only.

Non-UWP processes that have no GUI are always shown with a Running status, as Windows has no idea what these processes are actually doing (or not). The only exception is if all threads in such a process are suspended, and then its status changes to Suspended.

> [!note] 
>  The Windows API does not have a function to suspend a process, only to suspend a thread. Technically it’s possible to loop over all the threads in a certain process and suspend each one (assuming a powerful enough handle can be obtained). The native API (implemented in NtDll.Dll) does have a function for that purpose, NtSuspendProcess. This is the function called by Process Explorer if you right-click a process and choose Suspend. Of course the opposite function exists as well - NtResumeProcess.

#### User Name 

The user name indicates under what user the process is running. A token object is attached to the process (called Primary Token) that holds the security context for the process based on the user. That security context contains information such as the groups the user belongs to, the privileges it has and more. A process can run under special built-in users, such as Local System, Network Service and Local Service. 

#### Session ID

The session number under which session the process executes. Session 0 is used for system process and services and session 1 and higher are used for interactive logins.

#### CPU

This column shows the CPU percentage consumption for that process. Note it shows whole numbers only. To get better accuracy, use Process Explorer.

#### Memory

The memory-related columns are somewhat tricky. The default column shown by Task Manager is Memory (active private working set) (Windows 10 version 1903) or Memory (private working set) (earlier versions). The term Working Set means RAM (physical memory). Private working set is the RAM used by the process and not shared with other processes. The most common example of shared memory is for DLL code. Active private working Set is the same as Private working set, but is set to zero for UWP processes that are currently suspended.

#### Base Priority

The Base Priority column, officially called Priority Class, shows one of six values, that provide the base scheduling priority for threads executing in that process. The possible values with the priority level associated with them are the following:

• Idle (called Low in Task Manager) = 4

• Below Normal = 6

• Normal = 8

• Above Normal = 10

• High = 13

• Real-time = 24

The most common (and default) priority class is Normal (8).

#### Handles

The handles columns shows the number of handles to kernel objects that are open in a particular process.

